---
title:  "Raspberry (and older versions) running Raspbian on SSD"
category: raspberry
date: 2020-04-21
last_modified_at: 2019-04-21
excerpt: "Raspberry (and older versions) running Raspbian on SSD"
---

## Why running on SSD?

### Reliability
SD Cards are not reliable enough to safely run you RPI. The lifetime of Flash cards is limited by the maximum number of writes per memory cell. A flash card has an on-card memory controller that performs wear leveling management. This tries to spread write actions over all memory cells - through time - evenly, to prevent premature partial wear out. The wear levelling unfortunately does not completely prevent microSD cards in Raspberry Pi’s (and similar devices) from wearing out.

### Performance
SSD are showing far much greater performances. Some tests on the net are showing a factor of 3 to 5  (read/write) performance.

### Type of SSD
I like to use tiny mSATA SSD that I buy for less than 30$. Any other SSD can be used.
Pay attention to have a power supply strong enough to feed both the pi and the SSD.

## How?
Transfering an existing SD Cards Raspbian and associated application to the SSD is a piece of cake, and it has been greatly automated.

### Identifying your SSD
Your SSD should be on `/dev/sda`. 
You can further check it using:

    $ lsblk

### Stopping critical services
To avoid any issues during cloning, one should better stop all critical services / applications running on your Pi.

Identify running services:

    $ systemctl list-unit-files | grep enabled

Stopping enabled services:

    $ stop systemctl stop application.service
    # where application is the name of your service

### Cloning SD Card, and booting from SSD

Many websites are describing a "step-by-step" process, with lot of command lines to carry out this operation.
As a linux fellow user, I did it many times, but it's boring and not error proof. I was super happy to discover 
a magic shell script that does everything for you: [rpi-clone][rpi-clone].

Just follow the 4 + 1 optional steps below.

**Step1: download and install rpi-clone**

If not already done, install git on your raspbian or just skip the first command below

    $ sudo apt-get install git

Then, install rpi-clone

    $ git clone https://github.com/billw2/rpi-clone.git 
	$ cd rpi-clone
	$ sudo cp rpi-clone rpi-clone-setup /usr/local/sbin

**Step 2: prepare hostname**

rpi-clone-setup is for setting the hostname in /etc/hostname and /etc/hosts files. It is run automatically by rpi-clone if -s args are given, but before your first clone using a -s option, test run rpi-clone-setup with:

    $ sudo rpi-clone-setup -t testhostname
    # where testhostname is the host name of your pi


**Step 3: clone your SD card to USB disk, and tell the SD card to boot from disk**

If fstab uses PARTUUID:

    $ rpi-clone -l sda

If fstab uses device names:

	$ rpi-clone -l sda -e sda

To check your fstab file just look at it and check whether it is using PARTUUID or device names.

    $ cat /etc/fstab

As such the SD Card will only be used to tell the pi to boot from disk.

**Step4: reboot your pi**

    $ sudo reboot


**Step 5 (optional): boot directly from SSD, without SD card**

If you are using a pi3 (or older versions) you can boot from SSD only while activating *USB mass storage boot*.
This is not possible on pi4 at the time I am writing this article. This feature is known to be supported in a future update.
All details are provided on the raspberry [documentation][rpi-usb-mass-storage-boot].

[microSD]: https://hackernoon.com/raspberry-pi-4b-msata-ssd-vs-microsd-dg3j33ju
[rpi-clone]: https://github.com/billw2/rpi-clone
[rpi-usb-mass-storage-boot]: https://www.raspberrypi.org/documentation/hardware/raspberrypi/bootmodes/msd.md
