---
title:  "Building a Personal Site with Jekyll & Minimal Mistakes"
category: web
date: 2020-03-03
last_modified_at: 2019-03-14
excerpt: "A guide detailing my process for building this website using the static site generator Jekyll and the theme Minimal Mistakes"
---

I was looking for a solution to build a personnal website when I decided to launch Geekify.

I used to design websites on my own a couple of years ago but this time I wanted to leverage a more "ready-to-use" solution. I have played as well with blog / CMS platforms like [dotclear](http://kramdown.gettalong.org) and [Wordpress][wordpress].  Although these platforms are good, they are overkill for a simple blog like this one (database required, user management, etc ...). Looking at some alternatives, the concept of static websites generator was quite interesting, and so I decided to give a try to [Jekyll][jekyll].

## Static Web Site Generator

### Static vs. Dynamic

A static web page is delivered to the user's web browser exactly as stored, in contrast to dynamic web pages which are generated by a web application. A static website generator is doing all the magic to build a full static website so that publishers focus on writing the content. In short, a static web site generator takes a directory filled with text files edited in Markdown, renders that content with layouts / templates and generates a publish-ready static website.

### Jekyll

Geekify site is built using [Jekyll][jekyll], and I am using the theme [Minimal Mistakes][mmistakes]. 
Jek[Jekyll][jekyll]yll is defined as a simple, blog-aware, static site generator for personal, project, or organization sites. 
I decided to use [Jekyll][jekyll], since it is the generator used by Github. So to make a long story short, I am using Github not only to "version control" this website, but to host it as well.
Each commit and push result in an automatic update of this website, it is fast, reliable, and so easy to use!

## Starting with Jekyll and Minimal Mistakes

### Forewords
Many tutorials are available on the net. I am especially grateful to [Peter Wills][pwills] who did a great job sharing his experience. I have built this website based on the work he did to customize minimal-mistakes.
The website for Minimal Mistakes includes a great [quick-start guide][mmistakes_tuto]. This is definetely a good place to start. Using this you should be able to establish a base site with some simple demonstration content, using the Minimal Mistakes theme.

You can always look directly at [the source code for my site][mchacher_github] if you want to see exactly what I have in my `Gemfile`, or `_config.yml`, or whatever.

They key point is to enable minimal-mistake as a theme, this is done in the `_config.yml` file.
Designate the `remote_theme` variable, but do so after setting the theme, so that you have in your config file

    theme: "minimal-mistakes-jekyll"
    remote_theme: "mmistakes/minimal-mistakes"

### Customized Font Size, paragraphs layout

Like Peter Wills, I found the fonts a bit oversized, so I followed his recommendations to customize them. 
In order to do this, you need to copy the entire folder which contains all the relevant scss files. 

	cd $(bundle show minimal-mistakes-jekyll)
	cp -r _sass /path/to/site
	
The file `_sass/minimal-mistakes/_reset.scss` is defining 3 levels of `font-size`, respectively medium, large and x-large. This is then used in all `*.scss`.
I update the font-size as followed:

{% highlight html %}
File: _sass/_reset.scss
  @include breakpoint($medium) {
    font-size: 13px;
  }

  @include breakpoint($large) {
    font-size: 14px;
  }

  @include breakpoint($x-large) {
    font-size: 15px;
  }
{% endhighlight %}


I did further modification to fine tune the font-size in the different sections and ajust as well the margins. 
Most (not to say all) the modifications are done in the `*.scss*` files listed below:
* `_sass/minimal-mistakes/_archive.scss`
* `_sass/minimal-mistakes/_base.scss`
* `_sass/minimal-mistakes/_navigation.scss`
* `_sass/minimal-mistakes/_page.scss`
* `_sass/minimal-mistakes/_variables.scss`

You can have a look at the diff of the updates [here][github_diff]

### Using my own skin

Minimal Mistakes is defining a concept of `skins` to allow the color scheme customization. A set of skins is proposed by default as esplained in the documentation (Air, Aqua, Contrast ...).
The defaults skins files are located in `_sass/minimal_mistakes/skins/`.

To match the color chart of Geekify, I have simply defined my own skin files. This was super easy to implement. One can refer to my own custom file [_geekify.scss][skin_geekify].

[wordpress]: [https://wordpress.org/]
[jekyll]: https://jekyllrb.com/
[mmistakes]: https://mmistakes.github.io/minimal-mistakes/
[mmistakes_tuto]: https://mmistakes.github.io/minimal-mistakes/docs/quick-start-guide/#starting-from-jekyll-new
[mchacher_github]: https://github.com/mchacher/mchacher.github.io
[pwills]: http://www.pwills.com/
[github_diff]: https://github.com/mchacher/mchacher.github.io/commit/99876ad05e9dee1b126539fb22df16e15984339a?diff=split
[skin_geekify]: https://github.com/mchacher/mchacher.github.io/blob/master/_sass/minimal-mistakes/skins/_geekify.scss